---
layout: distill
title: My GSoC 2022 experience
description: Final thoughts on my Google Summer of Code 2022 project for the ns-3 organization
date: 2022-09-19

bibliography: 2018-12-22-distill.bib

# Optionally, you can add a table of contents to your post.
# NOTES:
#   - make sure that TOC names match the actual section names
#     for hyperlinks within the post to work correctly.
#   - we may want to automate TOC generation in the future using
#     jekyll-toc plugin (https://github.com/toshimaru/jekyll-toc).
toc:
    # if a section has subsections, you can add them as follows:
    # subsections:
    #   - name: Example Child Subsection 1
    #   - name: Example Child Subsection 2
  - name: Two-Ray fading model
  - name: Other Typography?
toc_float: false:
---


***

## Citations

Citations are then used in the article body with the `<d-cite>` tag.
The key attribute is a reference to the id provided in the bibliography.
The key attribute can take multiple ids, separated by commas.

The citation is presented inline like this: <d-cite key="gregor2015draw"></d-cite> (a number that displays more information on hover).
If you have an appendix, a bibliography is automatically created and populated in it.

Distill chose a numerical inline citation style to improve readability of citation dense articles and because many of the benefits of longer citations are obviated by displaying more information on hover.
However, we consider it good style to mention author last names if you discuss something at length and it fits into the flow well — the authors are human and it’s nice for them to have the community associate them with their work.

***

## Footnotes

Just wrap the text you would like to show up in a footnote in a `<d-footnote>` tag.
The number of the footnote will be automatically generated.<d-footnote>This will become a hoverable footnote.</d-footnote>

***

## Code Blocks

Syntax highlighting is provided within `<d-code>` tags.
An example of inline code snippets: `<d-code language="html">let x = 10;</d-code>`.
For larger blocks of code, add a `block` attribute:

<d-code block language="javascript">
  var x = 25;
  function(x) {
    return x * x;
  }
</d-code>

**Note:** `<d-code>` blocks do not look good in the dark mode.
You can always use the default code-highlight using the `highlight` liquid tag:

{% highlight javascript %}
var x = 25;
function(x) {
  return x * x;
}
{% endhighlight %}

***

## Other Typography?

Emphasis, aka italics, with *asterisks* (`*asterisks*`) or _underscores_ (`_underscores_`).

Strong emphasis, aka bold, with **asterisks** or __underscores__.

Combined emphasis with **asterisks and _underscores_**.

Strikethrough uses two tildes. ~~Scratch this.~~

1. First ordered list item
2. Another item
⋅⋅* Unordered sub-list. 
1. Actual numbers don't matter, just that it's a number
⋅⋅1. Ordered sub-list
4. And another item.

⋅⋅⋅You can have properly indented paragraphs within list items. Notice the blank line above, and the leading spaces (at least one, but we'll use three here to also align the raw Markdown).

⋅⋅⋅To have a line break without a paragraph, you will need to use two trailing spaces.⋅⋅
⋅⋅⋅Note that this line is separate, but within the same paragraph.⋅⋅
⋅⋅⋅(This is contrary to the typical GFM line break behaviour, where trailing spaces are not required.)

* Unordered list can use asterisks
- Or minuses
+ Or pluses


[I'm an inline-style link with title](https://www.google.com "Google's Homepage")

[I'm a reference-style link][Arbitrary case-insensitive reference text]

[I'm a relative reference to a repository file](../blob/master/LICENSE)

[You can use numbers for reference-style link definitions][1]

Some text to show that the reference links can follow later.

[arbitrary case-insensitive reference text]: https://www.mozilla.org

Inline-style: 

Inline `code` has `back-ticks around` it.

```javascript
var s = "JavaScript syntax highlighting";
alert(s);
```
 
```python
s = "Python syntax highlighting"
print s
```

Colons can be used to align columns.

| Tables        | Are           | Cool  |
| ------------- |:-------------:| -----:|
| col 3 is      | right-aligned | $1600 |
| col 2 is      | centered      |   $12 |
| zebra stripes | are neat      |    $1 |

There must be at least 3 dashes separating each header cell.
The outer pipes (|) are optional, and you don't need to make the 
raw Markdown line up prettily. You can also use inline Markdown.

Markdown | Less | Pretty
--- | --- | ---
*Still* | `renders` | **nicely**
1 | 2 | 3

> Blockquotes are very handy in email to emulate reply text.
> This line is part of the same quote.

Quote break.

> This is a very long line that will still be quoted properly when it wraps. Oh boy let's keep writing to make sure this is long enough to actually wrap for everyone. Oh, you can *put* **Markdown** into a blockquote. 


Here's a line for us to start with.

This line is separated from the one above by two newlines, so it will be a *separate paragraph*.

This line is also a separate paragraph, but...
This line is only separated by a single newline, so it's a separate line in the *same paragraph*.


***
## Two-Ray fading model

The model **aims to provide a performance-oriented alternative to the 3GPP TR 38.901
framework [TR38901]_ ** which is implemented in the ThreeGppSpectrumPropagationLossModel and
ThreeGppChannelModel classes and whose implementation is described in [Zugno2020]_.
The overall design follows the general approach of [1], with aim of providing
the means for computing a 3GPP TR 38.901-like end-to-end channel gain by combining
several statistical terms. The frequency range of applicability is the same as
that of [TR38901]_, i.e., 0.5 - 100 GHz.

### Two-Ray fading model implementation - TwoRaySpectrumPropagationLossModel

The computation of the channel gain is taken care of by the `TwoRaySpectrumPropagationLossModel`
class. In particular, the latter samples a statistical term which combines:

* The **array and beamforming gain**, computed as outlined in [Rebato2018]_ using the
  `CalcBeamformingGain` function. This term supports the presence of multiple
  antenna elements both at the transmitter and at the receiver and arbitrary antenna
  radiation patterns. Specifically, the array gain is compute as:

  $$
  \centering
  G_{\mathrm{AA}}(\theta, \varphi)=\left|\boldsymbol{a}^{\mathrm{T}}(\theta, \varphi)
  \boldsymbol{w}\left(\theta_0, \varphi_0\right)\right|^2=\left|\mathrm{AF}_{\mathrm{v}}(\theta,
  \varphi)\right|^2\left|\mathrm{AF}_{\mathrm{h}}(\theta, \varphi)\right|^2 G(\theta, \varphi), \\
  $$
  where:

  $$
  \centering
  \operatorname{AF}_{\mathrm{v}}(\theta, \varphi)=\frac{1}{\sqrt{N_{\mathrm{v}}}}
  \sum_{m=0}^{N_{\mathrm{v}}-1} e^{j k d_{\mathrm{v}} m\left(\cos \theta-\cos \theta_0\right)} \\
  $$ and
  $$
  \centering
  \operatorname{AF}_{\mathrm{h}}(\theta, \varphi)=\frac{1}{\sqrt{N_{\mathrm{h}}}}
  \sum_{n=0}^{N_{\mathrm{h}}-1} e^{j k d_{\mathrm{h}} n\left(\sin \theta
  \sin \varphi-\sin \theta_0 \sin \varphi_0\right)},
  $$
  where, in turn, \(N_h, N_v$\) are the number of horizontal and vertical antenna
  elements respectively, \(d_h, d_v\) are the element spacing in the
  horizontal and vertical direction respectively.

  Whenever the link is in NLOS, a penalty factor is introduced, to account for beam
  misalignment due to the lack of a dominant multipath component [Kulkarni]_;

* A **fast fading term**, sampled using the **Fluctuating Two Ray (FTR)** model distribution [Romero]_.
  The latter is a fading model which is more general than typical ones, taking into account two
  dominant specular components and a mixture of scattered paths. As, a consequence it has
  been shown to provide a better fit to fading phenomena at mmWaves. The model parameters
  are automatically picked once the simulation scenario is set, using a lookup table which
  associates the simulation parameters (such as carrier frequency and LOS condition) to the
  FTR parameters providing the best fit to the corresponding TR 38.901 channel statistics.
  As a consequence, *this channel model can be used for all the frequencies which are
  supported by the 38.901 model, i.e., 0.5-100 GHz*. The calibration has been done by
  first obtaining the statistics of the channel gain due to the small-scale fading in
  the 3GPP model, using an ad hoc simulation script
  (src/spectrum/examples/three-gpp-two-ray-channel-calibration.cc). Then, this information
  has been used as a reference to estimate the FTR parameters yielding the closest
  (in a goodness-of-fit sense) fading realizations, using a custom Python script
  (src/spectrum/utils/two-ray-to-three-gpp-ch-calibration.py).

**Note:**

  * To then obtain a full channel model characterization, the model is intended to be
    used in conjunction of the path loss and shadowing capability provided by the
    ThreeGppPropagationLossModel class.
    Indeed, the goal of this model is to provide channel realizations which are as close
    as possible to ones of [TR38901]_, but at a fraction of the complexity. Since the
    path loss and shadowing terms are not computationally demanding anyway, the ones of
    [Zugno2020]_ have been kept;

  * Currently, the value of NLOS beamforming factor penalty factor is taken from
    the preliminary work of [Kulkarni]_ and it is scenario-independent; As future
    work, the possibility of using scenario-dependent penalty factors will be
    investigated.


### Testing

The test suite TwoRaySplmTestSuite includes three test cases:

* FtrFadingModelAverageTest, which checks that the average of the Fluctuating Two Ray (FTR)
  fading model realizations is consistent with the theoretical value provided in [Romero]_.

* ArrayResponseTest, which checks that the overall array response at boresight computed by the ù
  CalcBeamformingGain function coincides with the expected theoretical values.

* OverallGainAverageTest, which checks that the average overall channel gain obtained using the
  DoCalcRxPowerSpectralDensity method of the TwoRaySpectrumPropagationLossModel class is close
  (it is, after all, a simplified and performance-oriented model) to the one obtained using
  the ThreeGppSpectrumPropagationLossModel and ThreeGppChannelModel classes.


### References

.. [TR38901] 3GPP. 2018. TR 38.901. Study on channel for frequencies from 0.5 to
   100 GHz. V.15.0.0. (2018-06).

.. [Zugno2020] Zugno, Tommaso, Michele Polese, Natale Patriciello, Biljana Bojović,
   Sandra Lagen, Michele Zorzi. "Implementation of a spatial channel model for ns-3."
   In Proceedings of the 2020 Workshop on ns-3, pp. 49-56. 2020.

.. [Polese2018] Michele Polese, Michele Zorzi. “Impact of channel models on
   the end-to-end performance of mmwave cellular networks”. In: 2018 IEEE 19th
   International Workshop on Signal Processing Advances in Wireless Communications
   (SPAWC).

.. [Rebato2018] Rebato, Mattia, Laura Resteghini, Christian Mazzucco, Michele Zorzi.
   “Study of realistic antenna patterns in 5G mmWave cellular scenarios”. In: 2018
   IEEE International Conference on Communications (ICC).

.. [Romero] Romero-Jerez, Juan M., F. Javier Lopez-Martinez, José F. Paris,
   Andrea J. Goldsmith. “The fluctuating two-ray fading model: Statistical
   characterization and performance analysis”. In: IEEE Transactions on Wireless
   Communications 16.7 (2017).

.. [Kulkarni] Kulkarni, Mandar N., Eugene Visotsky, Jeffrey G. Andrews. "Correction
   factor for analysis of MIMO wireless networks with highly directional beamforming.",
   IEEE Wireless Communications Letters, 2018

